Adds RapidPro best practices (#546)
medic/cht-docs: content/en/apps/guides/integrations/best-practices/rapidpro.md

    apps/guides/integrations/rapidpro
---

### Introduction
[RapidPro](https://app.rapidpro.io/) is the Open Source version of Textit, developed by UNICEF and Nyaruka, to  visually build workflow logic targeting mobile-based services. Here, we detail the best practices when working on a RapidPro deployment. Top of the list is to review RapidPro’s documentation to familiarize with various components including the [API](https://rapidpro.io/api/v2/). Next, we focus on various components or stages in the deployment process.

### [Workspaces](https://rapidpro.github.io/rapidpro/docs/orgs/)
Think of workspaces as the equivalent of an instance in the CHT. Medic has an internally hosted RapidPro. Ensure that you request for both `staging` and `production` workspaces early enough to allow SRE set up the workspaces on time.

### SMS Messaging Channels
- RapidPro supports both Android channels and SMS aggregators. Note that Android channels have a messaging limit of 330 outgoing messages/hour. If using Android channels, ensure that you install the maximum number of SMS packs and follow the following best practices for best results:
   1. Avoid the Android Channel going to sleep 

>     The following apply (based on Samsung A7 2018) with more details available on [dontkillmyapp](https://dontkillmyapp.com/samsung):

Reviewer: should we just link to https://dontkillmyapp.com's main page instead of their samsung page?  it provides recommendations for all sorts of phone varieties and i'm not sure it is safe to assume people would use an android

Author: Make sense.

      - Keep the phone plugged into a power source.

   2. Automatically Wake up the Phone 
      - The production RapidPro system uses Google Cloud Messaging which wakes up the phone whenever a message is sent. Install an APK that makes the channel to relay messages as soon as RapidPro emits.
   3. Alerts for when things go wrong 
      - Send monitoring emails and alert various parties when the Android Channel goes to sleep or becomes unavailable. This can be done from the channel's management page under `Alert Email`

- The Android channels can however, be used with a [bulk sender](https://help.nyaruka.com/en/articles/5153032-using-a-bulk-sender) to get past the 330 outgoing messages per hour.
- We recommend that you use shortcodes for SMS messaging, which can either be shared or dedicated. Dedicated are preferred because recipients do not have to include the keyword with each response submitted. Make sure to make arrangements for the shortcode in advance to avoid lags due to the duration it might take to fully set up one.
- Regarding SMS costs from experience, zero-rated messages are recommended so that respondents do not incur charges.

> ### Flow design

Reviewer: what about timeouts? anything to say on that?

Author: Adding.

Tips and best practices are listed below
 - Length of the survey.

>    - If possible, keep the questions to between 5 and 10. Long surveys may either lead to low completion rates or rushed responses that affects the data quality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - If possible, have less than 10 questions. Long surveys may either lead to low completion rates or rushed responses that affects the data quality.
```

Not sure if we need a lower limit (?)

- Types of questions

>    - Close ended questions are better and easier to respond and handle in RapidPro since respondents only have to send a number or letter such as 1 for “Yes”, 2 for “No”. Avoid sensitive questions since privacy cannot be guaranteed where shared phones are common.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Close ended questions are better and easier to respond and handle in RapidPro since respondents only have to send a number or letter such as 1 for “Yes”, 2 for “No”. 
   - Avoid sensitive questions since privacy cannot be guaranteed over SMS and where it is common to share phones.
```

- Intro and outro messages

>    - These serve the purpose of giving the survey details such as background of the survey, number of questions, data protection, whether there shall be follow up, SMS billing, thank you notes etc. Include these if possible.

Reviewer: the outro is also just helpful so users know when the survey is over.  we sometimes see >10mins between messages, so notifying users that the survey is over is often relevant to giving a good experience

- Consent and opt out
   - Include questions that give the respondent an opportunity to opt in or out of the survey. If they opt out, do not send a follow up text.
- SMS length
   - Keep it short, to the size of one SMS (160 characters). Longer messages may not display well on the recipients’ devices.

### Flow programming
- Utilize skip logic to ask relevant questions only e.g. number of children if only they have children.
- Automate error messages to to validate responses e.g. You submitted an invalid response. Reply 1 for “Yes”, 2 for “No”. These can be customized.

> - Use reminders and follow-up messages selectively on respondents by first differentiating those that completed a flow versus those that did not. This reduces spamming.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Reduce spammy messaging by using reminders and follow-up messages selectively on respondents by first differentiating those that completed a flow versus those that did not.
```

- Customize messages as much as possible by pre-populating information already known such as name, to target respondents, especially when phones are shared among clients.
- Translate all messages, especially when deploying in a multi-lingual environment. This ensures that respondents fully understand the survey in their language.
- Beware of the timing of the surveys that directly affects response rates. From experience, sending questions when respondents are busy with their errands during the day ultimately leads to low response rates as opposed to evenings when they are done for the day.
- Make sure you handle unsolicited responses by redirecting such to for example, a flow that eventually alerts concerned individuals e.g. reports of an outbreak etc.

### Configuration
1. Persist a unique identifier for each respondent entering the flows. This identifier shall be used to link flow runs to the recipients to make data analysis smooth.

> 2. Use consistent language and design patterns.

Reviewer: what do you mean here by consistent design pattenrs? consistent messaging patterns?

Author: Message design. For example, if a contact name comes at the beginning of a message, keep it that way all through.

3. Be mindful of when you save data back to the CHT. From experience, this should happen at major milestones in a flow e.g. end of a flow or before sending a payload to an API endpoint.

> 4. Utilize `globals`, shared values that can be referenced in flows, as well as broadcasts and campaigns, within your account referenced by `@globals.value_name`. This avoids re-entry of values in various components.

Reviewer: also allows flows to be shared easily in staging and production environments

> 5. Beware of concurrency that is not supported in RapidPro. Concurrency refers to a situation whereby one contact participates in more than one flows at the same time. Whenever this happens, the former flow shall be interrupted in favor of the latter. This can result in respondents exiting flows before completion, which impacts data quality. A master flow that controls individual flows is recommended. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Beware of concurrency that is not supported in RapidPro. Concurrency refers to a situation whereby one contact participates in more than one flows at the same time. Whenever this happens, the former flow shall be interrupted in favor of the latter. This can result in respondents exiting flows before completion, which is a confusing user experience and results in poor survey data. A master flow that spins up individual flows may be useful to consider. 
```

i think this was good for goma but may not be a blanket recommendation

Author: I think it's good to have it since we faced the same issue in CIHA and Malawi

6. Persist a respondent’s state in CHT. A state document is a JSON document that has calculated values of a respondent’s attributes or ledger of reports that is used by RapidPro to check the flows or questions one is eligible to receive. This document should not be editable by users directly. A sample is as follows:
```json
{
  "patient_uuid": "0123...",
  "language": "en",
  "tb": "true",
  "covid": "mild",
  ...
}
```

### Testing
Testing includes manual and scripted.
- Manual

>    - Test the workflows as close to production as possible. Telegram is a convenient way of validating the flows, but might not give a true picture of SMS in case of SMS messaging. Such testing will check SMS fidelity too.

Reviewer: this seems like 2 points

1. Telegram is an effective, free, convenient tool for testing that is great for developers and quick testing.
2. Prior to release, test the workflow as close to production as possible. Recommended to use the production messaging channels.

Author: Split.

>    - Piloting prior to a rollout is recommended. Remember, this shall expose the flows to real respondents and be helpful towards uncovering details such as text display among others.

Reviewer: and messaging fidelity was a big lesson fr us. don't assume the system's messaging fidelity, people might need to be attentive to that and pilot is very helpful

>    - In order to prevent breakages in flows test end-to-end and fully, especially when edits and changes are introduced to check that the entire flow is not impacted by the change. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - In order to prevent breakages in flows test end-to-end and fully as even minor edits/changes can have unpredictable impacts. Check that the entire flow is not impacted by the change prior to releasing in production.
```

- Scripted
These tests cover the parts that are inaccessible via manual tests. They include unit that test individual components and end-to-end tests that test a flow from start to end. From experience, and as a best practice, the following test pattern is recommended.
   - Create contact doc via cht-conf-test-harness
   - PUT docs into localhost API

>    - Trigger RapidPro flow

Reviewer: quite a tease to recommend this without a supporting lib :P some of these things were complex to get stable!

Author: Just a high level description of the pattern.

   - Wait for a RapidPro flow to complete
   - Fetch state of contact in RapidPro
   - Wait for document to be created in API
   - Inject document into cht-conf-test-harness
   - Mock passage of time to test task behaviour
   - One e2e test per production scenario
   - Replace test/contacts.js mock content

### Deployment

> - Make sure all your flows are in source control. For every change, no matter how small (fixing a typo, etc), at the very least, document and commit the JSON for the flows to Github.

Reviewer: why? this makes flows restorable, auditable, and releasable across environments

> - Always ensure that you use the automated deployment when pushing changes to an instance, be it staging or production. This is in line with CI/CD and helps to detect problems early.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It is recommended to use an automated deployment process when pushing changes to an instance - either staging or production. A CI/CD reduces manual errors and ensures your production state is tested and reproducible.
```

- Remember to set up the [rapidpro2pg](https://github.com/medic/rapidpro2pg) service to get your RapidPro workspace data over to the Postgres database.

### Monitoring
- Make sure you are monitoring workflows. Are they finishing as expected? Are some workflows not being used? 
   - A useful feature is the “send email” action whenever an unexpected event occurs while the flow is in progress e.g. failure calling an API endpoint
      - Include relevant parties in the monitoring notifications. For starters, a mailing group that includes all parties will do it without re-entry of each address of relevant recipients. 
      - Include notifications to respondents too, according to the messaging method. 

> - Check that your workspace has enough credits and top up on time when necessary.

Reviewer: ensure RapidPro email credit alerts are configured for your workspaces?

---
title: RapidPro best practices and lessons from integration with the CHT
linkTitle: "RapidPro"
weight: 20
description: >
    Best practices for RapidPro deployments
keywords: rapidpro, best practices, tips, lessons, integration
relatedContent: >
    apps/features/integrations/rapidpro
    apps/guides/integrations/rapidpro
---

### Introduction
[RapidPro](https://app.rapidpro.io/) is the open-source platform that powers of Textit, developed by UNICEF and Nyaruka, to visually build workflow logic targeting mobile-based services. Here, we detail the best practices when working on a RapidPro deployment. Top of the list is to review RapidPro’s documentation to familiarize with various components including the [API](https://rapidpro.io/api/v2/). Next, we focus on various components or stages in the deployment process.

### Workspaces

> Primarily identifying a company or project, a workspace contains models for a set of RapidPro users. We recommend that you set up `staging` and `production` workspaces so that builds, tests and updates can proceed safely before and after deployment.

Author: Nice.

### SMS Messaging Channels

> - RapidPro supports both Android channels and SMS aggregators. Note that Android channels have a messaging limit of 330 outgoing messages per hour. Ensure that you install the maximum number of SMS packs and follow the following best practices when using Android channels:

Author: Not really. Packs can be installed directly from the `RapidPro SMS Channel Android app`. Added that.

      - Keep the phone plugged into a power source.

   2. Automatically Wake up the Phone.
      - The RapidPro system uses Google Cloud Messaging which wakes up the phone whenever a message is sent. Install an APK that makes the channel to relay messages as soon as RapidPro emits.

   3. Alerts for when things go wrong. 
      - Send monitoring emails and alert various parties when the Android Channel goes to sleep or becomes unavailable. This can be done from the channel's management page under `Alert Email`

- The Android channels can be used with a [bulk sender](https://help.nyaruka.com/en/articles/5153032-using-a-bulk-sender) to get past the 330 outgoing messages per hour.
- It is recommended that you use shortcodes for SMS messaging, which can either be shared or dedicated. Dedicated Shortcodes are preferred because recipients do not have to include the keyword with each response submitted. Shortcode procurement can be a lengthy proceses, so make sure to make arrangements for the shortcode in advance. It is possible but inconvenient to migrate to a shortcode after deployment.

> - It is recommended that SMS costs be zero-rated so that respondents do not incur charges, to motivate them to respond.

Author: Makes sense.

### Flow design
Tips and best practices are listed below:
- If possible, have less than 10 questions. Long surveys may either lead to low completion rates or rushed responses that affects the data quality.
- Close ended questions are better and easier to respond and handle in RapidPro since respondents only have to send a number or letter such as 1 for “Yes”, 2 for “No”. 
- Avoid sensitive questions since privacy cannot be guaranteed over SMS and where it is common to share phones.
- Include intro and outro messages. Intro messages serve the purpose of giving the survey details such as the background of the survey, the number of questions, data protection, whether there shall be follow up, SMS billing, etc. Outro messages are helpful to notify respondents that they survey is over and commonly include thank you notes.
- Include questions that give the respondent an opportunity to opt-in or out of the survey. If they opt out, do not send a follow-up text.

> - Keep it short, to the size of one SMS (160 characters). Longer messages will be split may not display well on the recipients’ devices since Mobile Network Operators (MNOs) cannot guarantee that the multi-parts shall be delivered in the desired order. It is recommended that you retain the same message length as you localize to multiple languages. Truncate appropriately if long contact names included in the message push the length beyond the limit.

Author: Updated to use `Medic`

- Automate error messages to validate responses. For example, `You submitted an invalid response. Reply 1 for “Yes”, 2 for “No”`. These can be customized.
- Reduce spammy messaging by using reminders and follow-up messages selectively on respondents by first differentiating those that completed a flow versus those that did not.
- Customize messages as much as possible by pre-populating information already known such as name, to target respondents, especially when phones are shared among clients.
- Translate all messages, especially when deploying in a multi-lingual environment. This ensures that respondents fully understand the survey in their language.
- Beware of the timing of the surveys that directly affects response rates. From experience, sending questions when respondents are busy with their errands during the day ultimately leads to low response rates as opposed to evenings when they are done for the day.
- Make sure you handle unsolicited responses by redirecting such to, for example, a flow that eventually alerts concerned individuals such as reports of an outbreak.

> - It is recommended to use [timeouts](https://help.nyaruka.com/en/articles/2492419-adding-timeouts-to-a-flow) or [pauses](https://blog.textit.in/feature-update-add-timeouts-pauses-to-flows) to send automatic messages after a period of inactivity during a survey. This helps nudge the respondents to complete their flows..

Author: Good eye.

### Testing
Testing includes manual and scripted.

_Manual testing_
   - Telegram is an effective, free, convenient tool for testing that is great for developers and quick testing.
   - Prior to release, it is crucial that you test the workflow as close to production as possible. It is recommended to use the production messaging channels, to especially check messaging fidelity.
   - It is recommended that you run a pilot prior to scaling a deployment. Remember, this shall expose the flows to real respondents and be helpful towards uncovering details such as text display among others.
   - In order to prevent breakages in flows, run full end-to-end tests as edits/changes can have unpredictable impacts. Check that the entire flow is not impacted by the change prior to releasing in production.

> _Scripted testing_

Author: Done.

These tests cover the parts that are inaccessible via manual tests. They include units that test individual components and end-to-end tests that test a flow from start to end. As a best practice, the following test pattern is recommended:

>    - Create contact doc via cht-conf-test-harness

Author: Done.

weight: 20
description: >
    Best practices for RapidPro deployments
keywords: rapidpro, best practices, tips, lessons, integration
relatedContent: >
    apps/features/integrations/rapidpro
    apps/guides/integrations/rapidpro
---

### Introduction
[RapidPro](https://app.rapidpro.io/) is the Open Source version of Textit, developed by UNICEF and Nyaruka, to  visually build workflow logic targeting mobile-based services. Here, we detail the best practices when working on a RapidPro deployment. Top of the list is to review RapidPro’s documentation to familiarize with various components including the [API](https://rapidpro.io/api/v2/). Next, we focus on various components or stages in the deployment process.

### [Workspaces](https://rapidpro.github.io/rapidpro/docs/orgs/)

> Think of workspaces as the equivalent of an instance in the CHT. Medic has an internally hosted RapidPro. Ensure that you request for both `staging` and `production` workspaces early enough to allow SRE set up the workspaces on time.

Reviewer: agree. but i suspect there is still value in recommending staging and production environments or (A and B environments) so development can happen safely after the project is live

> Think of workspaces as the equivalent of an instance in the CHT. Medic has an internally hosted RapidPro. Ensure that you request for both `staging` and `production` workspaces early enough to allow SRE set up the workspaces on time.

Author: Reworded.

### SMS Messaging Channels
- RapidPro supports both Android channels and SMS aggregators. Note that Android channels have a messaging limit of 330 outgoing messages/hour. If using Android channels, ensure that you install the maximum number of SMS packs and follow the following best practices for best results:

>    1. Avoid the Android Channel going to sleep 

Author: Nice.

      - Android Settings > Device care > Battery > App power management > Apps that won’t be put to sleep. Make sure that the app is in this list. Turn off "Put unused apps to sleep."
      - Android Settings > System > Developer Options. Background Limit is set to Standard Limit. Make sure the RapidPro app has the toggle enabled in "Background Check" and ALL of my apps have "App Standby state: ACTIVE" in Standby apps.
      - Keep the phone plugged into a power source.

   2. Automatically Wake up the Phone 
      - The production RapidPro system uses Google Cloud Messaging which wakes up the phone whenever a message is sent. Install an APK that makes the channel to relay messages as soon as RapidPro emits.
   3. Alerts for when things go wrong 
      - Send monitoring emails and alert various parties when the Android Channel goes to sleep or becomes unavailable. This can be done from the channel's management page under `Alert Email`

- The Android channels can however, be used with a [bulk sender](https://help.nyaruka.com/en/articles/5153032-using-a-bulk-sender) to get past the 330 outgoing messages per hour.

> - We recommend that you use shortcodes for SMS messaging, which can either be shared or dedicated. Dedicated are preferred because recipients do not have to include the keyword with each response submitted. Make sure to make arrangements for the shortcode in advance to avoid lags due to the duration it might take to fully set up one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We recommend that you use shortcodes for SMS messaging, which can either be shared or dedicated. Dedicated Shortcodes are preferred because recipients do not have to include the keyword with each response submitted. Shortcode procurement can be a lengthy proceses, so make sure to make arrangements for the shortcode in advance. It is possible but inconvenient to migrate to a shortcode after deployment.
```

- Regarding SMS costs from experience, zero-rated messages are recommended so that respondents do not incur charges.

### Flow design
Tips and best practices are listed below
 - Length of the survey.
   - If possible, keep the questions to between 5 and 10. Long surveys may either lead to low completion rates or rushed responses that affects the data quality.
- Types of questions
   - Close ended questions are better and easier to respond and handle in RapidPro since respondents only have to send a number or letter such as 1 for “Yes”, 2 for “No”. Avoid sensitive questions since privacy cannot be guaranteed where shared phones are common.
- Intro and outro messages
   - These serve the purpose of giving the survey details such as background of the survey, number of questions, data protection, whether there shall be follow up, SMS billing, thank you notes etc. Include these if possible.
- Consent and opt out
   - Include questions that give the respondent an opportunity to opt in or out of the survey. If they opt out, do not send a follow up text.
- SMS length

>    - Keep it short, to the size of one SMS (160 characters). Longer messages may not display well on the recipients’ devices.

Reviewer: worth noting message length even for each translation.

how do we handle long names if the name is part of the message? this can go over character limit and i think i've seen us truncate?

### Configuration
1. Persist a unique identifier for each respondent entering the flows. This identifier shall be used to link flow runs to the recipients to make data analysis smooth.
2. Use consistent language and design patterns.
3. Be mindful of when you save data back to the CHT. From experience, this should happen at major milestones in a flow e.g. end of a flow or before sending a payload to an API endpoint.
4. Utilize `globals`, shared values that can be referenced in flows, as well as broadcasts and campaigns, within your account referenced by `@globals.value_name`. This avoids re-entry of values in various components.
5. Beware of concurrency that is not supported in RapidPro. Concurrency refers to a situation whereby one contact participates in more than one flows at the same time. Whenever this happens, the former flow shall be interrupted in favor of the latter. This can result in respondents exiting flows before completion, which impacts data quality. A master flow that controls individual flows is recommended. 

> 6. Persist a respondent’s state in CHT. A state document is a JSON document that has calculated values of a respondent’s attributes or ledger of reports that is used by RapidPro to check the flows or questions one is eligible to receive. This document should not be editable by users directly. A sample is as follows:

Reviewer: this is a pretty complex thing that we do... i'm not sure that just providing this one-liner + example is sufficient to explain this. i'd omit and it might be a good technical blog post or forum post. i'm not sure it's a great "best practice" as it is a bit niche

> 6. Persist a respondent’s state in CHT. A state document is a JSON document that has calculated values of a respondent’s attributes or ledger of reports that is used by RapidPro to check the flows or questions one is eligible to receive. This document should not be editable by users directly. A sample is as follows:

Author: +1 for consistency. I totally agree @kennsippell . I'll do a ticket for the blog post for tracking.

```json
{
  "patient_uuid": "0123...",
  "language": "en",
  "tb": "true",
  "covid": "mild",
  ...
}
```

### Testing
Testing includes manual and scripted.

> - Manual

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

_Manual testing_

```

   - Test the workflows as close to production as possible. Telegram is a convenient way of validating the flows, but might not give a true picture of SMS in case of SMS messaging. Such testing will check SMS fidelity too.
   - Piloting prior to a rollout is recommended. Remember, this shall expose the flows to real respondents and be helpful towards uncovering details such as text display among others.
   - In order to prevent breakages in flows test end-to-end and fully, especially when edits and changes are introduced to check that the entire flow is not impacted by the change. 

> - Scripted

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
_Scripted testing_

```

> These tests cover the parts that are inaccessible via manual tests. They include unit that test individual components and end-to-end tests that test a flow from start to end. From experience, and as a best practice, the following test pattern is recommended.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These tests cover the parts that are inaccessible via manual tests. They include units that test individual components and end-to-end tests that test a flow from start to end. As a best practice, the following test pattern is recommended:

```
Experience is subjective so it's best to just state the best practice.

   - Create contact doc via cht-conf-test-harness
   - PUT docs into localhost API
   - Trigger RapidPro flow
   - Wait for a RapidPro flow to complete
   - Fetch state of contact in RapidPro
   - Wait for document to be created in API
   - Inject document into cht-conf-test-harness
   - Mock passage of time to test task behaviour
   - One e2e test per production scenario
   - Replace test/contacts.js mock content

### Deployment
- Make sure all your flows are in source control. For every change, no matter how small (fixing a typo, etc), at the very least, document and commit the JSON for the flows to Github.
- Always ensure that you use the automated deployment when pushing changes to an instance, be it staging or production. This is in line with CI/CD and helps to detect problems early.
- Remember to set up the [rapidpro2pg](https://github.com/medic/rapidpro2pg) service to get your RapidPro workspace data over to the Postgres database.

### Monitoring

> - Make sure you are monitoring workflows. Are they finishing as expected? Are some workflows not being used? 
>    - A useful feature is the “send email” action whenever an unexpected event occurs while the flow is in progress e.g. failure calling an API endpoint

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Make sure you are monitoring workflows. Are they finishing as expected? Are some workflows not being used? A useful feature is the “send email” action whenever an unexpected event occurs while the flow is in progress, for example, failure calling an API endpoint.
```
